# Overview
RASM is a simple assembler for the RISC-V assembly language.  This was developed while assisting someone in learning assembly language and it was easy and fun to implement!  RASM reads a source file and makes 2 passes through the instructions to create an executable version of the program.  The first pass creates a symbol table of registers and labels and the second pass does the actual translation into the executable format.

## Key features
* Declare mnemonic names for registers
* Declare and reference labels for program control
* Extensible to add new pseudo-instructions to the list of OP codes (e.g. goto)
* Predefined memory locations for TEXTIO:, CONSOLE:, and  BITMAP: for the simulator
* Code printout containing the hex code, address, instruction and source line to help understand the translation 

# References
* [RISC-V simulator](http://tice.sea.eseo.fr/riscv/) - this is a really neat site that emulates the RISV-V architecture and allows for testing and tracing of programs.  The **a.hex** file generated by RASM is compatible with this site.

# Extensions
Sometimes it can be helpful to extend a language by adding new keywords.  RASM includes such a capability with a plugin Extension interface.  Extensions are written in java and must be a subclass of dac.rasm.Extension.  An individual extension can be added with '+x classname' on the command line. Multiple extensions can be added with the '+ext filename' command line directive where the referenced file contains the classnames of the extensions with one classname per line.

# Sample Program
This is small test program that moves a red block back and forth like the Cylons from the 1980's Battlestar Galactica.

```
prog:	cylon

declare:
	X_POS	X1
	X_DIR	X2
	X_MAX	X3
	COLOR	X4
	POS		X5
	BASE	X6
	COUNT	X7
	SPEED	X8

code:
START:
	set X_POS=0
	set X_DIR=1
	set X_MAX=31
	set BASE=BITMAP:
	lui BASE, 4096
	addi BASE, BASE, -1024
	set COLOR=200
	set POS=BASE
	set SPEED=1000
	
MOVE:
	set POS=BASE
	set POS=POS+X_POS
	sb COLOR,POS[0]	
	
	set X_POS=X_POS+X_DIR
	
CHECK_X_OVERFLOW:
	jump CHECK_X_UNDERFLOW if X_POS < X_MAX
	set X_DIR=-1
	goto DELAY
	
CHECK_X_UNDERFLOW:
	jump DELAY if X_POS >= zero
	set X_DIR=1
	
DELAY:
	set COUNT=0
DELAY_LOOP:
	set COUNT=COUNT+1
	jump DELAY_LOOP if COUNT < SPEED
	
ERASE:
	sb X0,POS[0]
	goto MOVE
```

# Sample Binary
```
:1000000093000000130110009301f001130300c0de
:1000100037130000130303c01302f00fb302600094
:100020001304803eb3026000b382120023804200ba
:10003000b380200063c630001301f0ff6f00c000e2
:1000400063d4000013011000930300009383130096
:10005000e3ce83fe238002006ff0dffc000000008f
:00000001FF
```
# License
Licensed under [Creative Commons Non-Commercial Attribution 3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/legalcode).  For the avoidance of doubt, use as part of course materials or requirements at an educational institution that charges tuition is a commercial use and requires a commercial license.  Use by students for personal education is not a commercial use.  
